hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss how to
access array elements using pointers
so considered this piece of code
We have an array of integers arr with elements
10 20 30 40 and 50 initialised into it
Now we declare an integer pointer ptr and assigning the
base address of array to ptr. Recall that the name
of the array or string holds the base address
So ptr now points to the first element of the array
ptr+1 points to second element
ptr+2 points to third element ptr+3 points
to forth element and ptr+4 points
to fifth element
Now let us see how to print address of each element
in the array using pointers
So see the programme
We created the integer array and a pointer ptr
and also in integer variable i
Now we assign the base address of array into the
pointer ptr. Now in a for loop we are printing
address of each element in the array
In the first iteration we print
&arr[0] equal to ptr+0
which is 1024
In the second iteration we print &arr[1]
equal to ptr+1
which is 1028
Since ptr is of integer type adding one will
add four bytes which is its size. Now in the third iteration
We print &arr[2] equal to ptr+2
to which is 1032
In the fourth iteration we print &arr[3]
equal to ptr+3 which is 1036. In the
fifth iteration we print &arr[4] equal
to ptr+4 for which is 1040. In the sixth
iteration
i equal to five which is not less than five
So control comes out of the for loop. So now
we got the address of each element using pointers now
let us see how to print values in the array
using pointers
So just as we discussed we have array arr with
elements 10 20 30 40 and 50 and we have pointer
ptr pointing first element of the array
Now we can access first element by writing
*(ptr+0) and second element using
*(ptr+1) similarly third element by *(ptr+2)
Fourth element by *(ptr+3)
and Fifth Element using *(ptr+4)
Now see the programme we have created the array
with five integers and a pointer ptr
points to the base address of arr
Now in a for loop  we are printing each element
in the array using *(ptr+i) which is
equivalent to writing arr[i]
In the first iteration we print arr[0] equal
to *(ptr+0) which is 10
In the second iteration we print arr[1] equal
to *(ptr+1) which is 20
in the third iteration we print arr[2] equal
to *(ptr+2) equal to which is 30
In the fourth iteration we print arr[3] equal to
*(ptr+3) which is 40
In the fifth iteration we print arr[4] equal
to *(ptr+4) which is 50
and in the sixth iteration condition fails since i equal to five
So control comes out of the for loop. so now
we got each element printed using pointers
Now let us learn how to manipulate arrays using
pointers
So consider the programme as we done before
We created an array with 10 20 30 40 and 50
Let ptr points to the first element of the array
Now suppose we want to change the fourth element in to 100
How can we do that using pointers? so we can
write *(ptr+3) which gets
us access to Forth Element
Now use assignment operator to set it to 100
now in the memory 40 is changed to 100
Now let us print all the elements using a for
loop
In the first iteration we print arr[0] equal
to 10
In the second iteration we print arr[1] equal
to 20
In the third iteration we print arr[2] equal
to 30
In the fourth iteration we print arr[3] equal
to 100. And in fifth iteration we print arr[4] equal
to 50
So that is how we can get each element's address,
value and modify them using pointers
So that's all and thank you for watching this video